--- Page 1 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
5
Notes
HEALTH INSURANCE
5.0 INTRODUCTION
With the increasing cost of health services and medical bills
which a common man can not afford, this class of insurance
has a growing market. It is estimated that a family spends an
average of 10% of its monthly income on health care. In India
where there is no Social Insurance for the public the individual
has to take care of himself and his family. A prolonged illness
or disability can spell havoc for the family budget and upset
all the planning. While the importance of Health Insurance
cannot be denied, it is unfortunate that so far in India the
Health Insurance policy is being purchased by families and
individuals who can afford to pay the medical bills. But the
Govt. of India is putting all its efforts to encourage people to
buy health insurance and specialized insurance companies
are promoted which are exclusively dealing in health insurance.
The life insurance companies are also permitted to issue the
health insurance policy.
5.1 OBJECTIVES
At the end of this lesson, you will be able to:
(cid:122) Know the meaning of Personal Accident Insurance.
(cid:122) Know the meaning of Health Insurance.
(cid:122) To understand buying methods of Health Insurance Policy.
(cid:122) Settle the claim under Health Insurance.
(cid:122) Know the practise of Health Insurance in India.
(cid:122) Know what is not covered under Health Insurance policy.
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 75

--- Page 2 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
Note: Dear students do not get panic while reading this chapter
because medical terminology being used here may be quite
difficult for you. But we have no other option rather than to
use these terminologies as per the need of this policy.
5.2 FEATURES/COVERAGES OF HEALTH
Notes INSURANCE POLICY
Any health insurance policy should cover the following the
expenses:
1) The policy should provide for reimbursement of
hospitalisation / domiciliary hospitalisation expenses for
illness/disease suffered or accidental injury sustained
during the policy period.
Hospital/Nursing Home: It means any institution in India
established for indoor care and treatment of sickness and
injuries, which
(cid:122) Has been registered either as a hospital or nursing home
with the local authorities and is under the supervision of
a registered and qualified medical practitioner.
(cid:122) Should comply with the minimum criteria as under:
a) It should be equipped with atleast 15 in-patient beds.
b) Fully equipped operation theatre of its own where
the surgical operations are carried out.
c) Availbility of fully qualified nursing staff round the
clock. Fully qualified doctor(s) should be in charge
round the clock.
The term Hospital / Nursing Home shall not include an
establishment which is a place of rest, a place for the aged, a
place for drug addicts or place for alcoholics, a hotel or a similar
place.
Domiciliary Hospitalisation Benefit means medical treatment
for a period exceeding three days for such illness / injury
which in the normal course would require treatment at the
hospital / nursing home but actually taken whilst confined at
home in India under any of the following circumstances
namely:-
(i) The condition of the patient is such that he / she cannot
be removed to the hospital / nursing home or
76 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 3 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
(ii) The patient cannot be removed to hospital / nursing home
due to lack of accommodation therein.
2) The policy should pay during the period of insurance
maximum up to the sum insured for expenses incurred
under the following heads:
Notes
(a) Room, Boarding Expenses in the Hospital / Nursing
Home
(b) Nursing Expenses
(c) Surgeon, Anesthetist, Medical Practitioner,
Consultants. Specialist fees
(d) Anesthesia, Blood, Oxygen, Operation Theatre
Charges, Surgical Appliances, Medicines and Drugs,
Diagnostic Materials, and X-Ray, Dialysis,
Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemaker,
Artificial Limbs and Cost of organs and similar
expenses
3) Reimbursement is allowed only when treatment is taken
in a hospital or nursing home which satisfies the criteria
specified in the policy.
4) Expenses on hospitalisation for minimum period of 24
hours are admissible. However, this time limit is not
applied to specific treatment i.e. Dialysis, Chemotherapy,
Radiotherapy, Eye Surgery, Dental Surgery, Lithography
(Kidney stone removal), D&C, Tonsillectomy taken in the
hospital / nursing home and the insured is discharged
on the same day ; the treatment will be considered to be
taken under hospitalisation benefit.
5) Relevant medical expenses incurred prior to up to certain
period, say 30 days and after hospitalization up to certain
period, say 60 days, are treated as part of the claim.
6) Any one illness means continuous period of illness and it
includes relapse within 105 days from the day of last
consultation with the Hospital/Nursing Home where
treatment may have been taken. Occurrence of same
illness after a lapse of 105 days will be considered as
fresh illness for the purpose of this policy.
7) The policy does not cover some disease i.e Asthma,
Bronchitis,Chronic Nephritis Diarrhea and all type of
Dysenteries including Gastroenteritis, Diabetes Mellitus
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 77

--- Page 4 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
and Insipid us, Epilepsy, Hypertension, Influenza, Cough
and cold, All psychiatric or Psychosomatic Disorders
Pyrexia of unknown origin for less than 10 days, Tonsillitis
and upper respiratory Tract infection including Laryngitis
and Pharyngitis, Arthritis, Gout and Rheumatism
Notes 5.3 EXCLUSIONS THAT THE HEALTH INSURANCE POLICY
DOES NOT COVER
a) All diseases / injuries which are pre-existing when the
cover incepts for the first time.
b) Any disease other than those stated in clause (c) below,
contracted by the insured person during the first 30 days
from the commencement date of the policy. This exclusion
shall not, however, apply if in the opinion of Panel of
Medical Practitioners constituted by the company for the
purpose, the insured person could not have known of the
existence of the disease or any symptoms or complaints
thereof at the time of making the proposal for insurance
to the company. This condition shall not however apply
in case of the insured person have been covered under
this scheme or group insurance scheme with any of the
Indian Insurance Companies for a continuous period of
preceding 12 months without any break.
c) During the first or more years of the operation of the
policy the expenses on treatment of diseases such as
Cataract, Benign Prostates Hypertrophy, Hysterectomy
for Menorrhagia or Fibromyoma, Hernia, Hydrocele,
Congenital Internal Disease, Fistula in anus. Piles,
Sinusitis and related disorders. If these diseases are pre-
existing at the time of proposal they will not be covered
even during subsequent period of renewal.
d) Circumcision unless necessary for treatment of a disease
not excluded hereunder or as may be necessitated due
to an accident, vaccination or inoculation or change of
life or cosmetic or aesthetic treatment of any description,
plastic surgery other than as may be necessitated due to
an accident or as a part of any illness.
e) Cost of spectacles and contact lenses, hearing aids. (These
may be termed as normal maintenance expenses.)
f) Dental treatment or surgery of any kind unless requiring
hospitalisation.
78 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 5 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
g) Convalescence, general debility, run down condition or
rest cure, congenital external disease, or defects or
anomalies, sterility, venereal disease, intentional self
injury and use of intoxicating drugs / alcohol.
h) Various conditions commonly referred to as AIDS.
Notes
i) Charges incurred at hospital or nursing home primarily
for diagnostic. X-Ray or laboratory examinations or other
diagnostic studies not consistent with the positive
existence or presence of any ailment, sickness or injury
for which confinement is required at a Hospital / Nursing
Home or at Home under Domiciliary Hospitalisation as
defined.
j) Expenses on vitamins and tonics unless forming part of
treatment.
k) Treatment arising from childbirth including Caesarean
section (can be deleted, if maternity benefit is covered).
l) Voluntary medical termination of pregnancy (abortion)
during the first 12 weeks from the date of conception.
m) Naturopathy treatment.
5.4 PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED FOR BUYING
HEALTH INSURANCE POLICY:
1) Filling of proposal form: The proposal form will contain
the personal information of the person like name, address,
age, occupation, sum insured etc. and two photographs
of an individual is to be enclosed.
2) Declaration of good health/medical questionnaire: A
person should give a declaration of his good health. In
case of adverse health then he should submit the
certificate from the doctor.
3) Medical examination report: It is required from the
doctor, who is having the qualification of MD, if the age
of person is more than 45 years. It is must even if the
person is possessing good health.
4) Payment: The premium is paid through cheque to get
the tax benefit under Income Tax Act, 1961.
5) Issue of Policy documents : The policy document is
issued once above mentioned information/documents
submitted.
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 79

--- Page 6 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
6) Issue of Photo Card by Third Party Administrator (TPA):
After issuing the policy documents, the TPA will issue
the photo identity card for each person which will help to
get the treatment in the hospital on cashless basis. TPA
are licensed by the IRDA who will settle the health
insurance claims on behalf of the insurance companies.
Notes
TPAs have empanelled various hospitals on all India basis
who will provide the health treatment on cashless basis
meaning thereby, that the policyholder will not pay any
amount to the hospital and the hospital will get the
payment directly from the TPA up to the sum insured of
a person. If some insured is not sufficient to meet the bill
of the hospital then the excess amount will be paid by
the policyholder.
5.5 MISCELLANEOUS CONDITIONS/BENEFITS
a) Age Limit: This insurance is available to persons between
the age of 5 years to 80 years. Children between the age
of 3 months to 5 years can be covered provided one or
both parents are covered concurrently.
b) Family Discount: This discount of 10% in the total
premium is allowed to a family comprising the insured
and any one or more of the following:
i) Spouse
ii) Dependent children (i.e. legitimate or legally adopted)
iii) Dependent parents
c) Cumulative Bonus: The sum insured is increased by
certain percentage, say 5% for each claim from the year
of insurance subject to a maximum accumulation of 10
years. In the event of a claim, the increased percentage
will be reduced to a certain percentage, say the double of
the bonus rate by 10% of the sum insured at the next
renewal but the basic sum insured will remain the same.
Some companies do not allow this cumulative bonus but
instead of this allow a discount in the premium on the
next renewal if no claim is reported during the currency
of the previous policy.
d) Cost of Health Checkup: The insured shall be entitled to
reimbursement of medical check up, generally once in
every four underwriting years, subject to no claim
preferred during this period. The cost shall not exceed
80 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 7 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
1% of the average sum insured during the block of four
years.
e) Extension of Cover: The health cover is available for
Indian Territories but it can be extended to Nepal and
Bhutan with prior permission.
Notes
5.6 CLAIM SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE
If any claim arises in health insurance policy, the same can
be settled in any of the following ways:
1. Reimbursement of expenses.
2. Cashless facility for planned hospitalization
3. Cashless facility for emergency hospitalization
1. Reimbursement of expenses: If a policyholder falls sick
and hospitalized in non-empanelled hospital then he
should follow the following procedure:
(cid:122) Intimation to the insurer/ Third Party Administrator
(TPA) along with the name of the person who has
fallen sick
(cid:122) Policy number
(cid:122) Name of the hospital
(cid:122) Name of the doctor
The above information should be sent within 7 days of
the hospitalization.
Within 30 days final claim form should be furnished along
with the following documents:
(cid:122) Hospital receipts/ original bills.
(cid:122) Cash memos.
(cid:122) Various reports and tests.
(cid:122) Hospital admission and discharge slip.
(cid:122) Case history.
(cid:122) Any other documents desired by TPA or hospital.
Note: Kindly ensure that insured person has been
admitted to a hospital/nursing home as defined in the
policy.
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 81

--- Page 8 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
2. Cashless facility for planned hospitalization:
(cid:122) The expected expenses to be incurred should be sent
to TPA through the agreed list of network hospital
(cid:122) Policy no. & card number should be shown to the
hospital
Notes
(cid:122) On confirmation from the TPA the treatment can be
taken in that hospital.
(cid:122) If expenses increase during the treatment then the
hospital will sent revised estimate to the TPA for their
approval.
(cid:122) For any post hospitalization treatment the original
bills/cash memos can be sent to the TPA after
completing the treatment for the reimbursement.
3. Cashless facility for emergent hospitalization
(cid:122) A card issued by the insurer should be shown to the
hospital.
(cid:122) The expected expenses may sent to the TPA for their
approval.
(cid:122) For any post hospitalization treatment the original
bills/cash memo can be sent to the TPA after
completing the treatment for the reimbursement.
Important: Kindly ensure that the Identity-Card is easily
available with the policyholder.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 5.1
1. Who settles the Health Insurance Claim?
2. What is the meaning of ‘family’ for health insurance?
5.7 TYPES OF HEALTH INSURANCE POLICY
a) Floater Health Insurance Policy: It means that a single
sum insured will be available for all family members.
For example, a family consists of self, spouse and two
children purchases health insurance of Rs 1.00 lakh.
Under the floater policy, any family member can avail the
medical claim of Rs 1.00 lakh. The coverage and other
terms & conditions are the same as are explained above
in para 5.1 to 5.3. The premium will be applicable to the
highest aged member of the family.
82 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 9 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
b) Critical Illness Insurance Policy: Critical illness
insurance or critical illness cover is an insurance product,
where the insurer is contracted to typically make a lump
sum cash payment if the policyholder is diagnosed with
one of the critical illnesses listed in the insurance policy.
The policy may also be structured to pay out regular Notes
income and the payment may also be on the policyholder
undergoing a surgical procedure, for example, having a
heart bypass operation.
The contract terms contain specific rules that define when
a diagnosis of a critical illness is considered valid. It may
state that the diagnosis need be made by a physician
who specializes in that illness or condition, or it may name
specific tests, e.g. EKG changes of a myocardial infarction,
that confirm the diagnosis.
c) Group Health Insurance Policy: The Group Health
Insurance Policy is available to any Group / Association
/ Institution / Corporate body of more provided it has a
central administration point and subject to a minimum
number of persons to be covered. The group policy is
issued in the name of the Group / Association /
Institution / Corporate Body (called insured) with a
schedule of names of the members including his/her
eligible family members (called insured persons) forming
part of the policy.
The details of insured person is required to furnish a
complete list of Insured Persons in the prescribed format
according to sum insured.
Any additions and deletions during the currency of the
policy should be intimated to the company in the same
format. However, such additions and deletions will be
incorporated in the policy from the first day of the following
month subject to pro-rata premium adjustment.
No change of sum insured for any insured person will be
permitted during the currency of the policy.
No refund of premium is allowed for deletion of insured
person if he or she has recovered a claim under the policy.
The coverage under the policy is the same as under
Individual Mediclaim Policy with the following differences:-
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 83

--- Page 10 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
a) Cumulative bonus and Health Check up expense are
not payable.
b) Group discount in the premium is available
c) Renewal premium is subject to claims made during
the previous policy .
Notes
d) Maternity benefit extension is available at extra
premium. Option for maternity benefits has to be
exercised at the inception of the policy period and no
refund is allowable in case of insured cancellation of
this option during currency of the policy. A waiting
period of 9 months is applicable for payment of any
claim relating to normal delivery or caesarean section
or abdominal operation for extra uterine pregnancy.
The waiting period may be relaxed only in case of
delivery , miscarriage, or abortion induced by accident
or other medical emergency. Claim in respect of
delivery for only first two children will be considered
in respect of any one insured person. Those insured
persons who already have two or more living children
will not be eligible for this benefit. Expenses incurred
in connection with voluntary medical termination of
pregnancy during the first 12 weeks from the date of
conception are not covered.
d) Overseas Medical Policy:
This policy was originally introduced in 1984 to provide
for payment of medical expenses in respect of illness
suffered or accident sustained by Indian residents during
their overseas trips for official or holiday purpose.
The insurance scheme, since 1984 has been modified
from time to time to provide for additional benefits such
as in-flight personal accident, loss of passport etc. In 1991,
Employment and Study Policy was introduced. This policy
is meant for Indian citizens temporarily working or
studying abroad.
Eligibility:
(a) Indian Residents undertaking bonafide trips abroad for:
(i) Business and official purposes.
(ii) Holiday purpose
84 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 11 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
(iii) Accompanying spouse and children of the person who
is going abroad will be treated as going under holiday
travel.
(iv) Foreign Nationals working in India for Indian
employers of Multi-National Organisation getting their
salary in Indian Rupees, covering their official visits
Notes
abroad provided they are undertaken on behalf of
their employers.
Age Limit:
(a) For adults upto 70 years
(b) Cover beyond 70 years is permissible at extra premium.
(c) Children between the age of 6 months to 5 years are
covered by excluding certain specific children diseases.
Period of Insurance
The Insurance is valid from the first day of insurance and
expires on the last day of the number of days specified in the
policy schedule or on return to India whichever is earlier.
Extension of the period of insurance is automatic for the period
not exceeding 7 days, and without extra charge, if necessitated
by delay of public transport services beyond the control of the
insured person.
COVERAGE Section A - Personal Accident
This insurance will pay upto the limit as shown in the Schedule
if the insured person sustains accidental bodily injury and
such bodily injury within 12 months of the date of the injury
is the sole and direct cause of death or loss of eye(s) or limb(s).
Not more than US $ 2,000 is payable in respect of death if the
insured person’s age is under 16.
Section B - Medical Expenses and Repatriation
This insurance will pay up to the limit shown in the Schedule
in total for the insured person in respect of covered medical
related expenses, incurred outside the Republic of India by
the insured person suffering bodily injury, sickness, disease
or death during the period of insurance.
Covered Expenses:
(a) Expenses for physician services, hospital and medical
services and local emergency medical transportation.
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 85

--- Page 12 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
(b) Upto US $ 225 per occurrence, in case of dental services
for the immediate relief of dental pain only. However,
dental care necessary as a result of a covered accident
shall be subject to the limit of cover and deductible.
(c) Expenses for physician ordered for emergency medical
Notes evacuation, including medically appropriate
transportation and necessary medical care enroute, to
the nearest hospital when the insured person is critically
ill or injured and no suitable local care is available.
(d) Expenses for medical evacuation, including transportation
and medical care enroute to a hospital in India or the
insured person’s normal place of residence in India when
deemed medically advisable by the Medical Advisors and
the attending physician.
(e) If the insured person dies outside India, the expenses for
preparing the air transportation of the remains for
repatriation to India or up to an equivalent amount for a
local burial or cremation in the country where the death
occurred.
Specific Conditions
a) No claim will be paid in respect of
(i) expenses for treatment which could reasonably be
delayed until the Insured Person’s return to the
Republic of India. The question of what can or what
cannot be reasonably delayed will be decided jointly
by the treating physician and the Medical Advisors.
(ii) cosmetic surgery unless necessary as a result of a
covered accident.
(iii) routine physical examination or any other
examination where there is no objective indication of
impairment of normal health.
b) The insurance will not cover pregnancy of the Insured
Person including resulting childbirth, miscarriage abortion
or complication of any of these.
c) Restricted Cover: In the event that the proposer is unable
to present himself or herself for medical examination
where called for by the Insurance Company, the limit of
indemnity under this insurance is reduced to US $ 10,000
in respect of and limited to the expenses for physician
86 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 13 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
services, hospital physician and medical services and local
emergency transportation. Such limit applies to medical
expenses incurred through illness or disease only.
Section C - Loss of checked baggage
This insurance will pay up to the limit of cover shown in the
Notes
Schedule of the policy in the event of the Insured Person
suffering a total loss of baggage that has been checked by an
International Airline for an International flight.
Section D - Delay of checked baggage
This insurance will pay up to the limit of cover shown in the
schedule for the necessary emergency purchase of replacement
items in the event that the Insured Person suffers a delay of
more than 12 hours from the scheduled arrival time at the
destination for delivery of baggage that has been checked by
an International Airline for an International outbound flight
from India.
Section E - Loss of passport
This insurance will pay upto the limit of cover shown in the
schedule for the reimbursement of actual expenses necessarily
and reasonably incurred by the Insured Person in connection
with obtaining a duplicate or fresh passport.
No claim will be paid that is less than the deductible stated in
the schedule. The deductible shall apply to each insured event
and shall be borne by the Insured Person.
Section F - Personal Liability
This insurance will pay up to the limit of cover shown in the
schedule if the Insured Person in his or her private capacity
becomes legally liable to pay for accidental bodily injury to
Third Parties or accidental damage to Third Party Property,
arising from an incident during the covered trip.
General Exclusions: (All Sections) No claim will be paid:
a) In respect of a medical condition that was known by the
insured person to exist and/or he had been treated for
the condition in the one year immediately preceding the
effective date of the policy
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 87

--- Page 14 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
b) Where the insured person:
(i) is traveling against the advice of a physician
(ii) is on waiting list for specified medical treatment; or
(iii) is traveling for the purpose of obtaining medical
Notes treatment; or
(iv) has received a terminal prognosis for a medical
condition.
c) Suicide, attempted suicide, venereal disease or abuse of
drugs or alcoholic drinks.
d) In respect of medical services obtained within India.
e) Arising from the insured taking part in Naval, Military or
Air Force operations.
f) Arising from aviation except where the insured flies as a
passenger in an aircraft properly licensed to carry
passengers.
g) Arising from participation in professional sports events
or other hazardous sports.
h) Where there is another insurance covering the same
interest e.g. health insurance, any occupational benefit
plan, national health insurance scheme or public
assistance programmes, except in excess of the benefit
under such plan, insurance or scheme.
e) Corporate Frequent Travelers
This is an annual policy granted to officials of companies
registered under the Companies Act, who are regularly
traveling abroad.
The salient features of the endorsement are :
a) The insurance is valid in respect of trips undertaken
during the 12 months following the date of purchase as
stated in the schedule - subject to the duration of any
one trip not exceeding 30 /45 days.
b) In the event that the insured person is travelling outside
India on the last day of insurance the cover shall extend
to include duration of trip until his return to India within
30 days of the expiry date.
c) No cover is available for persons over the age of 70.
88 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 15 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
d) i) A person up to 60 years of age need not undergo
medical check-up. However, a person over 60 years
of age but within 70 years of age must undergo at
the inception of the annual cover a full medical
checkup including Blood / Urine Strip Test and
E.C.G.
Notes
ii) The cover granted is always subject to the insured
person advising the Insurance Company any material
change in his health condition. Policy to be issued to
individuals only.
f) Employment and Study Policy
The policy is designed for Indian citizens temporarily
posted abroad in a sedentary non-manual work or
students pursuing studies or engaging in research
activities abroad.
The salient features of the Scheme are:
– Age limit: 18 to 60 years
– Limit of Liability : U.S. $ 75,000/- any one insured
person and in all any one period of insurance.
Premium : The premium for the policies issued to the
executives of corporate clients for employment purposes will
be paid in foreign currency and the premium for students
going abroad for higher studies will be paid in Indian Rupees.
The premium varies according to the age group 18-40 and 41-
60 and the type of plan. The same rate applies to accompanying
spouse but a lower rate is charged for child under 18 years.
For students premium varies according to the type of plan.
The benefits are divided into 2 sections :
Section I:
Sub—Section A:
Medical Expenses incurred in respect of disease / injury
contracted / sustained during the policy period limited to
maximum liability
(I) under the policy
(II) 52 weeks after the onset of injury / sickness
(III) 12 weeks after the expiration date of the insurance
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 89

--- Page 16 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
Sub—Section B :
If the insured person is evacuated to India the insurers will
pay medical expenses in India, as provided under Sub-section
A above in addition but within the overall limit of US $ 75,000.
Sub—Section C:
Notes
Repatriation and Alternative Expenses ; In the event of the
death of an insured person, the insurers will pay the actual
expenses for preparation and transportation to India of the
remains of the insured person or funeral expenses incurred
in the country of posting, not exceeding US $ 8,000 in total.
Sub–Section D:
Medical Emergency Reunion Expenses upto US $ 5,000/-in
all when as a result of a covered injury or covered sickness
insured person is hospitalized and it is agreed by all parties
that the insured person shall be medically evacuated to India
as soon as possible, insurer will pay upon the recommendation
and prior approval of the claims administrator the following
expenses incurred in respect of travel by the mother or father
or guardian or spouse.
a) The cost of an Economy Air Ticket for one person from
India to the airport serving the area where the Insured
Person is hospitalized and returned to India.
b) Reasonable travel and accommodation expenses incurred
in relation to Emergency Reunion.
Section II
Contingency Insurance - (Applicable to sponsored students
only)
In the event that it is mutually agreed that the insured person
is unable to continue completion of his studies in the country
of study (the details of which are declared in the proposal
form) due to covered injury or covered sickness first occurring
in the country of study resulting in (a) Death or (b) Loss of
entire sight of either or both eyes, or (c) Permanent total
disablement and is medically evacuated under section I (B)
above or a valid claim is payable under section I(C), this
insurance will pay by way of recompense a benefit to the
nominated sponsor who has provided financial support to the
insured person as regard the insured period of study overseas
90 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 17 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
and is declared in the proposal form at a rate of US $ 750
capital sum for each month of study completed during the
period of insurance.
In case the insured cannot continue to complete his course of
studies due to mental, nervous or emotional disorder, this
benefit is limited to 25% of the amount due. But if the Notes
educationalist running the insured person course consider
that because his performance on and his attitude to the studies
were unsatisfactory, he is unable to complete his course of
study no benefit would be payable.
INTEXT QUESTIONS 5.2
1. What is meaning of Floater Health Insurance Policy?
2. How many sections are in Overseas Medical Policy?
5.8 SUMMARY
Health insurance requires attention of all members of society
due to factors like
(cid:122) Medical inflation,
(cid:122) Increasing life expectancy,
(cid:122) Increasing load of lifestyle diseases and
(cid:122) Uncertainties in individual employability and earnings
Living long and dying young are both creating new tensions
in the society. We are not having proper health social security
system in India and every household is spending major part
of its earning on medical expenses. If we, all members of the
society (who can afford health insurance) decide to buy health
insurance at earliest eligible age, consciously or unconsciously,
then a proper health social security system will prevail in the
country.
5.9 TERMINAL QUESTIONS
1) Define the features of the Health Insurance Policy.
2) Explain the exclusions of the Health Insurance Policy.
3) Discuss the features of the Overseas Medical Policy.
4) Explain the features of Personal Accident Insurance policy.
5) Discuss the claim procedure to be followed to get the
claim in case of death of an insured person.
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 91

--- Page 18 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
6) Write short notes on
i) Permanent total disability ii) Group Personal
Accident iii) Procedure to taking the personal accident
insurance policy
Notes 5.10 OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTIONS
1. Which of the following criteria may not be complied
with in the definition of hospital/nursing home, if it
is not registered
a. Fully equipped OT
b. At least 10/15 in-patients beds
c. Tie up with TPA
d. Fully qualified nursing staff
2. The Standard Medi-claim Policy excludes any disease
(other than diseases excluded during the first two years
of operation) for how many days from commencement
of policy.
a. 30 b. 45
c. 15 d. 60
3. Which of the following is excluded in the Standard
Medi–Claim Policy
a. Simple Tooth Extraction b. Cataract Operations
b. Hysterectomy d. All the above
4. Select the appropriate options
1) Domiciliary Hospitalization benefit is covered under
a Individual Medi-claim policy
2) Cost of health check up is covered and Individual
Medi–claim Policy
a. Both statements are false
b. Both statements are true
c. Statement 1 true but statement 2 is false
d. Statement 1 is false but statement 2 is true
92 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

--- Page 19 ---
Health Insurance MODULE - 4
Practice of General Insurance
5. Which of the following is covered under Medi–claim
Insurance Policy?
a. Dental treatment b. Cost of Spectacles
c. Cost of Pacemaker d. Cosmetic Surgery
6. Income tax benefit under Section 80(D) of Income Tax Notes
Act is admissible
a. If premium is paid in cash
b. If premium is paid by cheque
c. (a) and (b)
d. None of the above
7. Claims are settled under the Overseas Mediclaim Policy
a. By the Policy Issuing Office
b. Overseas Claim Settlement Agent
c. Insured pays to the hospital and seek reimbursement
d. Lloyds of London
8. Universal Health Insurance Policy for BPL families is
issued by
a. Private and PSU Insurers b. PSU Insurers only
c. Central Government d. State Government
9. In respect of Medi Claim Policy, TPA denote
a. Third Party Availability for claims
b. Third Party Administrator
c. To Pay Afterwards
d. None of the above
10. Medical Benefit under UHIS is restricted to
a. Rs. 30,000/- per family
b. Rs. 30,000/- per member
c. Rs.50,000/- per family
d. Rs.12,500/- per member
DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES 93

--- Page 20 ---
MODULE - 4 Health Insurance
Practice of General Insurance
5.11 ANSWERS TO INTEXT QUESTIONS
5.1
1. Either Insurance Company or through Third party
Administrator (TPA)
Notes
2. Self, Spouse, depended children and depended parents
5.2
1. A single sum insured floats among the all family
members.
2. There are six sections in the policy.
5.12 ANSWERS TO OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTIONS
1.c 2. a 3. a 4.a
5 c . 6. b 7. b 8. a
9. b 10. c
94 DIPLOMA IN INSURANCE SERVICES

